---
layout: post
title:  "working through cold springs (1)"
date:   2024-05-15
tags: books listicle cold_springs
---

# so what's cold springs
cold springs is a [village](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cold_Spring,_New_York) about an hour from new york city. a while ago[^1] my friends and i went ostensibly to hike but actually spent more time walking around town, taking pictures, and going to the library. the library was selling books, $2 for paperbacks and $3 for hardcovers, so we obviously bought ~50 books.

so anyways, these posts are chronicling my thoughts on these books. i probably won't keep them permanently, because i'm moving them around with my friends, but who knows. also, (N) indicates i haven't actually finished the specified book yet. 

## (N) the mysterious adventures of sherlock holmes (doyle)
i got this book primarily because of my calculus teacher's lament that nobody read holmes anymore. i generally like old pop fiction[^2] and i liked this little collection too. 

## twilight of the elites: america after meritocracy (hayes)
this is a dated[^3] book with some fundamental truth to it: that meritocracy, which consists of equality of opportunity and inequality of outcome, fails due to two primary reasons: <br>
1. once one gains inequal outcome, there's nothing that pushes them back down (see: nepo babies)
2. the extremes of inequality of outcome eventually lead to inequality of opportunity   
<br>

i remain a staunch meritocracist anyways, because i believe that the tenets of meritocracy are generally better than the alternatives (from aristocracy to random selection). "true meritocracy", like all "true" ideologies, only works if people are ants. 

## (N) all the president's men (bernstein and woodward)
a stimulating recollection of how watergate came about, written by the two journalists who uncovered it. written exactly in the journalistic style of the time, with gratuitous cuts and so many side characters. bonus: a 1996 plane ticket to boston was apparently used as a bookmark in this book. 

## on writing well (zinsser)
a great book on how to write. i especially like its structure; the transition from the fundamentals of good writing (simplicity, style, and good english) to detailed commentary on different types of writing (sports, science/technology, memoir) was well-done. bonus: i finished reading this book the day of my AP english language exam.[^4]

## (N) all quiet on the western front (remarque)
i understand why people laud this book. the intricacy of what makes war war: fighting and waiting and eating and watching other people die, *that* is extricated beautifully in remarque's writing. look at this scene:

> We sit opposite each other, Kat and I, two soldiers in shabby coats, cooking a goose in the middle of the night. We don't talk much, but I believe we have a more complete communion with one another than even lovers have. 

> We are two men, two minute sparks of life, outside is the night and the circle of death. We sit on the edge of it, crouching in danger, the grease drips from our hands, in our hearts we are close to one another, and the hour is like the room: flecked over with the lights and shadows of our feelings cast by a quiet fire. What does he know of me or I of him? Formerly we should not have had a single thought in common -- now we sit with a goose between us and feel in unison, are so intimate that we do not even speak.

## if i did it: confessions from the killer (goldman family)
this book convinced me that OJ is completely guilty. nobody innocent writes a book detailing how "hypothetically" he'd kill the two people he's suspected of murdering. it also convinced me that a news storm does absolutely nothing to clarify any criminal case, ever. weird coincidence that OJ died of cancer almost exactly a month before i read this book.
<br>

-----
[^1]: mid-april 2024
[^2]: like [strange case of dr jekyll and mr hyde](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strange_Case_of_Dr_Jekyll_and_Mr_Hyde#)
[^3]: very liberal mentions of TARP and the tea party of the 2010s
[^4]: it didn't help, i wrote gibberish during the essay portion. 