---
layout: post
title:  "heuristics are easy, acting is hard"
date:   2024-06-02
tags: pedagogy books long
---

# prelude
note that this blogpost is breadth-heavy. imagine this as an eruption of things i've been "working on" for the past few months, loosely coherent through a shared theme of learning. i may or may not write more posts about the various topics within this post, depending on if i spend more time committing to them or if i feel i have a lot to say. 

# reading about learning
one of my main interests is in making things more efficient. i love reading about theories, routines, hacks, and examples that give me hope that the world can be a better place if only we did them. i also happen to love reading about theories behind the slow collapse of the western world. a little list of things i've read, in roughly chronological order: [^1]

> 1. *The Power of Habit* by Charles Duhigg
1. *Atomic Habits* by James Clear
1. *Getting Things Done* by David Allen
1. *Digital Minimalism* by Cal Newport
1. *iGen: Why Today's Super-Connected Kids Are Growing Up Less Rebellious, More Tolerant, Less Happy -- and Completely Unprepared for Adulthood* by Jean Twenge
1. *Industrial Society and its Future* by Ted Kaczynski[^2]
1. *Thinking, Fast and Slow* by Daniel Kahneman
1. *A Conflict of Visions* by Thomas Sowell[^3]
1. *Deep Work* by Cal Newport
1. *Dopamine Nation: Finding Balance in the Age of Indulgence* by Anna Lembke
1. *Stolen Focus: Why You Can't Pay Attention -- and How to Think Deeply Again* by Johann Hari
1. *How to Become a Straight-A Student* by Cal Newport
1. *Democracy in America* by Alexis de Toqueville
1. *So Good They Can't Ignore You: Why Skills Trump Passion in the Quest for Work You Love* by Cal Newport
1. *Why Don't Students Like School? A Cognitive Scientist Answers Questions About How the Mind Works and What it Means For the Classroom* by Daniel Willingham
1. *How to Explain Absolutely Anything to Absolutely Anyone* by Andy Tharby
1. *Ultralearning* by Scott Young
1. *Shortchanged: How Advanced Placement Cheats Students* by Annie Abrams[^4]
1. *Four Thousand Weeks: Time Management for Mortals* by Oliver Burkeman

you might have noticed that a lot of these books are less political and more timeless, and a lot of them relate to how to learn. this is because i'm in the stage of my life where i can leisurely sip knowledge at my own pace, and since i'm a full-time student[^5] learning takes up a majority of my time. i think that these books can be sorted into two categories:

1. "here's a life-hack, extended"
2. "here's a theory of everything (scope may vary)"

both of these categories are useful in their own ways; the first provides more reasonable advice for execution, while the second enables concepts to be integrated easily into one's own system of thought. which brings me to another point...

# learning about reading
theory is all good, but what about practice? i've tried to implement the various techniques in the books i've read, with varying levels of success. 

## experiment 1. myself
i find it most comfortable to experiment on myself; i'm afraid of irritating others, and i know the worst thing that can happen is that i'm personally irritated. i know that this can introduce bias, but i figure that "rigor" was never a goal of mine in experimentation, and i do this for fun[^6]. 

### trial 1. digital minimalism (may 2023 -- present)
following a general feeling of malaise and subsequent bias-researching[^7], i came to the conclusion that my smartphone and social media addiction were making me a worse person. this led to two things: i stopped using a smartphone and i tried to cut down on social media. i would say that the former worked out significantly better than the latter, as i've gone back on my social media cuts but never on my smartphone ban. also i've normalized living ~in the moment~ much more than not mindlessly scrolling (i just do it on my laptop... still harder than mindlessly scrolling on a phone, but I still do it). 

### trial 2. personal knowledge management (? -- present)
the thought of a "theory of everything" is very alluring to me. so much so that i dove deep into how to improve my brain, whether that be through memory improvement or "building an external brain", so i could keep everything within myself. i began with trying to optimize the current tools i relied on to learn, from what textbooks to read to how best to take notes. later on, 

## experiment 2. influencing the blind

everything within this section is a work-in-progress. anyways, i've tried to implement these ideologies with people younger than i am, with some success and some failure. i do carry some sentimentality and an inability to ignore the past[^8], so 

## trial 3: influencing friends

this was an inadvertent "natural experiment", where my own actions rippled out to my friends. 

# the spherical cow
but most of what i've learned is generally not plug-and-play. 

-----
[^1]: no way a list is in my long-form piece!1! also **disclaimer** i don't agree with every one of these books, this is just a list of what i read lol
[^2]: best known for [other work](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/bd/Theodore_John_Kaczynski_-_Boundary_functions_%281967%29.pdf)
[^3]: a book my calculus teacher recommended. also probably the best one out of this list
[^4]: indirectly recommended to me by my history teacher
[^5]: high school junior
[^6]: read: me coming up with excuses for being lazy about stuff
[^7]: where you only look up evidence that supports your preconceptions
[^8]: me when i'm coping